

deBack2012 - Lineage Specification in Pancreas Development

This model of two neighbouring pancreas precursor cells, describes the
exocrine versus endocrine lineage specification process. To account for the
tissue scale patterns, this couplet model has been extended to hundreds of
coupled cells.

This model is described in the article:

[On the role of lateral stabilization during early patterning in the
pancreas](http://identifiers.org/doi/doi:10.1098/rsif.2012.0766)

de Back W., Zhou JX, Brusch L

J. R. Soc. Interface 6 February 2013 vol. 10 no. 79 20120766

Abstract:

The cell fate decision of multi-potent pancreatic progenitor cells between the
exocrine and endocrine lineages is regulated by Notch signalling, mediated by
cell–cell interactions. However, canonical models of Notch-mediated lateral
inhibition cannot explain the scattered spatial distribution of endocrine
cells and the cell-type ratio in the developing pancreas. Based on evidence
from acinar-to-islet cell transdifferentiation in vitro, we propose that
lateral stabilization, i.e. positive feedback between adjacent progenitor
cells, acts in parallel with lateral inhibition to regulate pattern formation
in the pancreas. A simple mathematical model of transcriptional regulation and
cell–cell interaction reveals the existence of multi-stability of spatial
patterns whose simultaneous occurrence causes scattering of endocrine cells in
the presence of noise. The scattering pattern allows for control of the
endocrine-to-exocrine cell-type ratio by modulation of lateral stabilization
strength. These theoretical results suggest a previously unrecognized role for
lateral stabilization in lineage specification, spatial patterning and cell-
type ratio control in organ development.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels)
and identified by:
[MODEL1211010000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1211010000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

